Some people compare Chinese censorship to an Orwellian dystopia—a society with no individual freedoms and tight, intensive control of media and information and therefore its people and eventually their thoughts and behaviors. Censorship in China has a long history, dating back to over 2000 years ago when its emperor burned books and intellectuals who criticized him.  Although today it is much less brutal and extreme, Chinese censorship still exists and to a point where it is unethical for modern standards (Liu). In fact, Freedom House ranked China last and Reporters Without Borders fourth to last in 2016 for their corresponding worldwide indexes of press freedom (Xu). The Chinese government has broken many ethical and human rights boundaries over their intensive censorship and thought control policies, but the international community does next to nothing because they might lose out on a huge Chinese market; it is until the international community bands together as a whole, that the world can reform Chinese policies over censorship, or it can have long-lasting negative ramifications.
China has long kept a tight grip over media and information in the country because of their fear of losing party control and stability. With President Xi Jinping in power, censorship has only gotten worse as he looks to consolidate power. President Xi states that “all the work by the party’s media must reflect the party’s will, safeguard the party’s authority, and safeguard the party’s unity ... [media must align themselves with the] thought, politics, and actions … [of the party];” a China Daily essay also emphasizes that for Xi “the nation’s media outlets are essential to political stability” (Xu). In China’s constitution, it gives citizens the freedom of speech and press, but the constitution also allows the government all power to remove and crack down on information that exposes ‘state secrets’ or ‘endangers’ the country. The definitions of what are ‘state secrets’ or things that ‘endangers’ the country are inherently vague, and the Chinese government uses that to their advantage (Xu).
There are multiple ways that the country cracks down on information. The country has 12 governing bodies and around 2 million workers reviewing and enforcing censorship laws. Anyone who does not comply with those laws could be imprisoned, with 38 journalists being imprisoned, as of 2017 (Xu). The main way that the country censors information is through the ‘Great Firewall’. Chinese officials use this firewall to block any undesirable sites such as, Amnesty International, Facebook, Twitter, and Google (McDonell); however, citizens in the past could bypass the firewall through uses of VPNs—services in which a user can spoof his or her location to somewhere else—but the country is actively fighting VPN access and use. China is forcing companies, like Apple and Microsoft, to remove all VPN services from their app store and devices or face being kicked out of the Chinese market and replaced by a Chinese variant for not complying to party demands, like Google did (Vanderklippe).
The most famous Chinese variant is the social media platform and the country’s most powerful censorship tool, WeChat.  WeChat, owned by Tencent, is not state controlled, but by law, has to report any person who can be a ‘danger’ to the party. WeChat is a do it all application used for text messaging, group chats, photo sharing, location searching, electronic payments, and the news. The Chinese government monitors all messages of those using the app, a severe privacy infringement, and is notified when keywords are used. For almost all people in China, it is the main, if not only, communication and news platform and is as indispensable as the phone itself. With WeChat, not only can the country restrict what people say, even in their ‘private’ conversations, but restrict what they see in their social media and news feeds, and therefore their perceptions of the country and world around them (McDonell).
China has a tight grip on the press, controlling all news and television companies in China. All work by state journalist must pass a set of rules created by the government and through the central propaganda department. Violators can lose their job or even be imprisoned. An example is the recent disappearance of Lu Guang, award-winning Chinese photojournalist. He disappeared, reportedly in Xinjiang, a region in the spotlight for its interment of Uighurs Muslims. Lu’s photography often exposes the harsh realities of the poor, forgotten people of China. The international community suspects that China arrested him, typical of their policies of “quashing dissent” (Berlinger). Domestic journalists are not the only ones the Chinese government controls. Any international journalist needs special permission before reporting and often face government intimidation to portray the country in a good light (McDonell).
Innately, all this censorship will have a huge effect on Chinese culture. People are fearful to speak their minds not only inside but outside of China. Blocking VPNs also makes Chinese citizens feel that they are the only ones against the party, as it is now harder than ever for them to find other voices similar to theirs. Crackdown on VPNs and international media has also made it difficult for academics and scientists to access information, like economic data and scientific research,  and collaborate with other academics from outside the country. Jasmine Bernstein Yin, a Chinese Columbia University student, states: "My middle-school classmates who remained in China think very different from the study abroad groups... It's nearly impossible to escape and become an independent thinker" (McDonell). Chinese propaganda has already begun stripping their citizens of their individuality and independent thinking. Through using fear tactics and strict censorship, China violates and crosses the line on human rights of freedom of speech, expression, and press for greater stability, efficiency, and control for its party. However, this does not just affect domestically; its effects can be seen internationally.
The international community recognizes the unethical practices of Chinese domestic censorship, but because of China’s great market value and power, the international community, more specifically corporate companies, not only condones it but succumbs to the party’s whims for their shareholders and profit.  China is trying to condition not only its own citizens but the world of its norms and is succeeding to some extent, as next to no one is stopping them. Companies are fearful of losing a huge if not the biggest market in the world and are willing to compromise morally and ethically for capital gain. With more and more companies succumbing more of its policies to China, the Chinese government has been steadily increasing pressure on foreign companies to follow its political orders, extending it political censorship outside its borders (Rogin).
A recent example is three major U.S. airlines, United, American, and Delta, caving into China’s order to portray Taiwan as a part of China to avoid face ‘severe punishments’. Although they did not recognize Taiwan as part of China, they removed the word Taiwan from their websites. By even somewhat accommodating Chinese policy, the airlines are assisting a false depiction of China, in terms of U.S. policy, and in turn making U.S.’s view of Taiwan’s status become more unclear, which makes it easier to manipulate and change in the future. Even with those compromises, China’s civil aviation authority called the airlines’ actions incomplete and threatened to damage the airlines’ businesses if the full order is not fulfilled, which violates international trade laws. Although the Trump administration called this situation an “Orwellian nonsense, ” airline administration recognized that the U.S. government was not ready to fully escalate against China (Rogin), and if they went to the U.S government for help, China could retaliate by blocking the company from the country or slowly driving the company out of the country with a parallel Chinese one.  Outside the U.S., companies are similar being pressured to uphold China’s propaganda. After a tweet containing a quote from the Dalai Lama from Mercedes, Chinese news sources branded Mercedes as the “enemy of the people,” for which Mercedes promptly apologized and removed the tweet. Since China is the carmakers biggest market, accounting for a quarter of its sales, the Chinese government could use its market value as a leverage to force its political agenda onto them (Mozur). International and American companies will not be guided by their moral standards, as their shareholders and profits are more important, and their corresponding governments do not have the jurisdiction to tell them what to do (Rogin). This leads to China being able to bully the international community to do its bidding, without much consequence, and spreading its censorship and propaganda worldwide.
But Chinese international censorship does not just stop at international companies, China hopes to infiltrate academia as well. Many chinese citizens study abroad, and although China does not have as much control over them as if they were in China, the government still spends a lot of time and money to ensure those citizens either do not find bad things about the party, or if they do, ensure that they will not say or spread any of it. 350,000 Chinese citizens study in the U.S alone, and China spends hundreds of millions of dollars to lobby universities to self censor themselves, with the greatest offender being Columbia University. Columbia often cancels talks that might upset government officials, and students are scared to fully express their ideas and would have to censor themselves with a fear of not getting a Chinese visa in the future. For Chinese citizens, saying bad things studying abroad could hurt your family back at home. An example of this is Yang Shugping, a commencement speaker at the University of Maryland, who praised the U.S for its “fresh air.” Days later, she was berated online, her family address exposed on the internet, and had to apologize for her words. Chinese censorship extends to American professors as well as for example, David Shamburg, a China expert from George Washington University, lost his reputation and access to Chinese scholars, analysis, and officials after publishing a paper on the potential fall of Chinese communism (Fish).
China does not only use intimidation to force its political will. China has been exporting its internet censorship tools around the world. Countries like Iran and North Korea used Chinese backed censorship services to ‘clean’ their internet. British pornographic filters are controlled by the Chinese government as well. International governments cooperating and allowing China to censor their countries are furthering the party’s plan for full global internet control (Eades).
China has so much power that it is near impossible to combat their censorship policies. NGOs, like Committee to Protect Journalists, have pushed China to publicly address their censorship, but China has done nothing but brushed the committee to the side (Berlinger). In fact China has enacted new laws that give police the right to question, search, and seal off premises and assets from NGOs who oppose the party. NGOs are losing what little power they have to enact change and have little incentive to keep operating (Gan); instead, the only option for true change is through the entire international community pressuring China through very harsh economic sanctions and bans. One country is not enough, as seen with the U.S. currently falling in the trade war. This, however, is hard, if not impossible, as the international community will always put short term goals over moral long term ones, especially because not dealing with China today will save huge amounts of money for countries and companies. A compromise is for the international community to become steadily more resistant to the demands of China, little by little, over time, succumbing to less requests. The losses would not be as extreme as system wide pressure and it will send a message to China that pushing their boundaries past their own borders will not be tolerated. Channing censorship in China from within is near unfeasible; however if more companies and countries do their part and steadily resist demands, China will slowly lose what control it has over the global internet.  
Chinese censorship is a scary thought, and if not addressed could have huge negative implications. We can already see Chinese citizens being politically persecuted for the things they say online, and the international community slowly being censored and pressured into Beijing's wants and punished if they refused. The only way to combat Chinese censorship, at least in the international stage, is for international corporations and governments to band together to force China to change, but as China grows to be one of the premier global economic powerhouses, international corporations and governments are forced into abiding with Chinese policies for the short-term goal of more profit and to ensure their shareholders and stock prices are happy. If the international community could look past the short-term benefits, and look at this problem through an ethical and moral lens, they could work together to avoid a Chinese controlled global internet and to preserve internet freedom outside China, or the internet may well indeed start looking like an Orwellian dystopia.
