Rafael Leonidas Trujillo was born on October 24, 1891, to two middle-class parents in San Cristobal, Dominican Republic. He started as a sugarcane plantation guard and eventually joined the Dominican National Guard and was trained by U.S Marines. He rose the ranks in the military and eventually became commander in chief of the National Army in 1927 (History).  After seizing power through a military revolt, he would obtain absolute control over the country for 31 years until his assassination in 1961 (Encyclopædia Britannica). His regime would come to be known as one of the longest and most horrible regimes in modern Latin American history. Trujillo shares enough similarities—rising to power during a time of unrest, state capitalism, ethnic cleansing and nationalism, and violence—to past fascist regimes to be diagnosed as fascist.     
After the assassination of dictator Ulises Heureaux, the Dominican Republic fell into a time of chaos. Not being able to pay back debts, the Dominican Republic was threatened, in 1903, by France and other creditor nations to either pay back their debt or have it collected by force. Theodore Roosevelt and the United States government came to the rescue by administering Dominican finances and becoming a receiver for the bankrupt nation. After a dispute with the then interim president Francisco Enriquez for rejecting a treaty suggested by the U.S, the United States Navy began to occupy the Dominican Republic and enacted a direct military government under U.S rule; however, the military occupation was a failure, especially after the U.S withdrew its best officers for World War I. Dominicans were hesitant of letting outsiders rule, and U.S officials made no effort to learn their culture. President Harding would start withdrawing all U.S influence in 1922 and in 1924, under a U.S supervised presidential election, transferred power to Horacio Vasquez (Bailey 678-681). Vasquez would be an incompetent and corrupt leader and during the Great Depression in 1930, Trujillo would take advantage of the nation’s civil unrest by leading armed forces to a military takeover, in which he would become the next Dominican dictator (Encyclopædia Britannica).
Trujillo, although feared, was mostly admired by Dominicans. They saw him as ‘fundamentally Dominican’  and admired his bold personality and ability to stabilize the country politically and economically. That stability attracted many foreign investors, including the U.S, and many foreign news media called his regime a “Dominican miracle,” downplaying many of his abuses, human rights violations, and lack of improvement for the most impoverished in the country  (Encyclopædia Britannica). Trujillo was very effective in his use of propaganda due to the fact that he was was extremely self-centered and especially self-conscious of his own and his regime’s image. In an attempt to gain better global legitimacy, he gave international professors, universities, public officials, and newspapers his own biography as gifts (Hamill 218).  In the Dominican Republic he reclassified his position, not as the ‘President’, but as the ‘Benefactor’ or ‘El Jefe/The Boss’ and renamed many important monuments, cities, and geographic locations to his name; for example, he changed the capital from Santo Domingo to Ciudad Trujillo. Throughout the country, he erected billboards and signs praising himself and his regime (Galindez 240). He also had full control over leadership and censorship in the church, education system, and entertainment industry (Encyclopædia Britannica). Through his use of propaganda, control over almost every element of his people’s society, and his secret police, Trujillo would build and mold an image of himself as an effective, action leader and savior, whom his people would admire and fear, in the eyes of the international and domestic community.
Along with his propaganda, Trujillo appealed to many Dominicans through his racially and nationalistically-driven ideology. Dominicans pride themselves of being of Spanish descent and cultured in their traditions. Inspired by and adopting Hitler’s racial theories and even some of his policies, Trujillo would become so obsessed over race that he would use makeup to make his face more white and adopt a ‘whitening plan’ or ‘blanqueamiento’ (Wucker). Trujillo was scared of Haitians ‘darkening’ his people and began cracking down on Haitian immigration (History).  Haitians have been ingrained in Dominican ideology, preceding Trujillo, as a historic enemy of the state and a racially inferior ‘other’.  After border disputes with Haiti, in 1937, Trujillo arrested around 20,000 men, women, and children immigrants who were deemed black Haitians and murdered them in what is known as the Parsley Massacre. The Dominican government would justify the massacre as ‘patriotic’ farmers protecting their land from ‘cattle rustlers’ (Paulino). Trujillo was also very brutal against political enemies using his secret police to not only censor the press but also to torture and kill his enemies in orchestrated ‘suicides’ (History).
Even though many Dominicans were informed of such horrible actions, they felt pride in Trujillo’s accomplishments and saw them as a restoral of Dominican traditional glory and respectability. Citizens felt unaffected by Trujillo’s brutality and were willing to ignore them for their new stability, a key reason why Trujillo remained in power for so long. Trujillo would develop the economy, pay off foreign debt, and ‘Dominicanize’ the economy—taking over many foreign-owned companies and placing Dominicans in their stead (Wiarda et.al 252-254). Trujillo also established a Board of Agricultural Protection, which distributed land among financially lacking farmers so they could cultivate crops, ‘combating idleness’. He would add more than 2100 kilometers of highways and 380 bridges and improve sanitation and social welfare by adding 17 hospitals and constructing sewer and drainage systems. Trujillo would do all of this and more while also pandering to Western countries, especially the United States, by maintaining a democratic facade and fighting against Communism (Trujillo 218-232).   
Trujillo would take advantage of the United States’s Good Neighbor Policy, a policy in which the U.S. would promote a more collaborative relationship with Latin American countries and become less interventionist, to gain more weapons and to legitimize his regime globally. Trujillo would bribe U.S congressmen to spread goodwill about his regime abroad and used his relationship as a ‘junior partner’ of the United States to help portray his country as modern and powerful. Trujillo would take great effort to create a democratic facade. He had choreographed elections, fake opposition parties, and faked having term limits, giving power to his family members while he truly ran the country from the background. Also, Trujillo was anti-communist. He saw communists as political enemies of his regime plus it aligned with U.S. policy against communism (Derby 3-7, 143). Although Trujillo faked that he ruled through a democracy, in actuality he shares many similarities to past fascist regimes.
Fascism is a difficult concept as there is no set, agreed upon definition on what makes a regime fascist; however, with enough parallels with past fascist regimes, one can diagnose a regime as one. Fascism is characterized by its flexibility; each fascist regime is  unique from the others, but they all carry the core ideology of an ultra-nationalist, capitalist, totalitarian state built upon violence. Even if a regime does not fully fit the classification of fascism, many oppressive regimes share similar traits and actions, and understanding fascism and its consequences  is important for recognizing and preventing future oppressive regimes. In the case of Trujillo, he was a Fascist. His rule was definitely totalitarian, and adding alongside his use of victimhood, enforcement of state capitalism, and manipulation of nationalism, violence, and fear, he fulfills the minimum conditions of what one can call a Fascist.
Like many fascist regimes in the past, Trujillo rose through chaos and instability. Before Trujillo, the Dominican Republic was a country in poverty with its ‘countryside full of bandits and criminals’; after Trujillo gained power he “did away with the political disaster; he did away with the disorder, and put everyone to work. People preferred to sacrifice some of their liberty so that the country could rise above the state of anarchy” (Derby 1).  In Germany, Nazism arose from the inability of the past regime, the Weimar Republic, to enact change in a time of humiliation and economic hardship (Choices 12-13). In both cases, since there was instability created from their respective predecessors, it left room ideologically and politically for the fascist regimes to step into power.
A defining characteristic that separates fascist regimes from communist ones is its appeal to agriculture and state capitalism. In the Po Valley, farmers turned to fascist for protection from socialist and their labor exchanges. Fascist gave peasants jobs and land and monopolized the farm labor market. They also insured that private property stayed intact and forced collectivization was stopped (Paxton 60-63). Similarly, Trujillo’s Board of Agricultural Protection, like the fascist in Po Valley, distributed land among financially lacking farmers and put them to work (Trujillo 223-225). Trujillo built an interdependence between the peasants and himself, as the peasants had no political alternative to him if they needed social capital or contacts to help them out of poverty (Derby 10). The fascists, from a time of economic instability, presented themselves as the only alternative to reinvigorate their respective economies, especially in the agricultural field.
Fascists stepped into power by taking advantage of instability and fixing many social and economic issues with their countries, but they maintain their power through oppression, fear, and hatred. Trujillo used Dominican ingrained hatred of Haitians and racial pride, creating his policy: “Dominicans united against  Haitians” (Derby 24). He made Haitians as the ‘other’ and an ‘oppressor’ of his people. Trujillo would expand the military fifteen-fold and used ‘military theatre,’ like the Parsley Massacre, to simultaneously terrify Haitians and win over Dominicans. Any political opposition was systematically arrested, tortured, and publically killed. Political repression, fear, and hatred were tools he used to keep tight control and to ensure a long-lasting regime in his country. Trujillo ensured no one would oppose him and directed all his citizens' anger to the Haitians, whom they already hated (Derby 2-3). Fascists use similar tactics.  Like Trujillo, Nazis made the dominant group feel victimized to the ‘oppression’ of minorities, the Jews, creating a constant fear of an outgroup. Hitler manipulated nationalist and racial superiority sentiment to mobilize the masses to fight against the ‘enemies of the people.’ For fascists, an ethnic minority to scapegoat and the creation of an everlasting enemy helps present fascism as the only option to save the people from their ‘oppressors’ and is a key characteristic on how they maintain power (Stanley).
Towards the end of his regime, however, Trujillo began to lose supporters. In 1950, domestic opposition grew, he began losing support in the army, and the secret police had to jail more and more dissenters. Foreign countries, including the U.S, also started to pressure him to liberalize his rule. Trujillo became paranoid after finding out that Cuba and Venezuela supported assassination attempts on him, which led him to try to assassinate Romulo Betancourt, the Venezuelan president, in 1960, with much international backlash (Encyclopædia Britannica).  The U.S fully withdrew its support from the Dominican Republic, and on May 30, 1961, he was assassinated by four men with an automatic rifle, a carbine, and two shotguns (Illson).
Trujillo may have created political and economic stability in his country, but the way he achieved those goals were of the most cruel and oppressive manner. In exchange for stability, his regime ruled with absolute authority leaving no room for opposition or freedom of expression and sometimes resorting to heinous acts of violence. Trujillo at first glance may seem a progressive and efficient leader, but unlike the media sources of the time, it is important not to downplay or dismiss the problems with his or any regime, especially if they have fascist tendencies. In Trujillo’s case, he was a fascist, but even for regimes that are not truly fascist, it is important to look out for any fascist warning signs. Fascism and what we learned from its history is a powerful tool to not only indicate a rise of unjust and cruel power but also to remind ourselves what may happen if we leave such regimes alone. If such regimes can be recognized and pressurized or acted upon more quickly, horrible events like the Parsley Massacre may be averted.
